Add documentation for star tree index feature (#8598)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _search-plugins/star-tree-index.md

---
layout: default
title: Star Tree index
parent: Improving search performance
nav_order: 54
---

# Star tree index

This is an experimental feature and is not recommended for use in a production environment. For updates on the progress the feature or if you want to leave feedback, join the discussion on the [OpenSearch forum](https://forum.opensearch.org/).    
{: .warning}

Star Tree Index is a multi-field index that improves the performance of aggregations.

> OpenSearch will use the star-tree index to optimize aggregations based on the input query and star-tree configuration. No changes are required in the query syntax or requests.

Reviewer: use the same statement as earlier.

## Star tree index structure

<img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/star-tree-index.png" alt="A Star Tree index containing two dimensions and two metrics" width="700">

Star Tree index structure as portrayed in the above figure, consists of mainly two parts:
- Star Tree and 
- Sorted and aggregated star-tree documents backed by doc-values indexes
    - The values are sorted based on the order of `ordered_dimension` , in the above example, first by `status` and then by `port` for each of the status.

>     - For each of the unique dimension values combinations , we also pre-compute the aggregated values for all the metrics such as `avg(size)` and `count(requests)` 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - For each of the unique dimension value combinations, the aggregated values for all the metrics such as `avg(size)` and `count(requests)` are pre-computed during ingestion time.
```

> Each node in the Star Tree points to a range of star-tree documents.

Reviewer: Be consistent, either use Star Tree or star-tree, I see both getting used widely.

Author: Using Star Tree everywhere, thanks

A node is further split into child nodes based on [max_leaf_docs configuration]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/field-types/star-tree/#star-tree-configuration-parameters).

> The number of documents a leaf node points to is than or equal to `max_leaf_docs`. This ensures the maximum number of documents that gets traversed to get to the aggregated value is at most `max_leaf_docs`, thus providing predictable latencies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The number of documents a leaf node points to is less than or equal to `max_leaf_docs`. This ensures the maximum number of documents that gets traversed to get to the aggregated value is at most `max_leaf_docs`, thus providing predictable latency.
```

There are special nodes called `star nodes (*)` which helps in skipping non-competitive nodes and also in fetching aggregated document wherever applicable during query time.

The figure contains three examples explaining the Star Tree traversal during query: 

> - Compute average request size aggregation with Terms query where port equals 8443 and status equals 200 (Support for Terms query will be added in upcoming release)

Reviewer: Can we add the issue it for the upcoming release?

Author: https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/15257 - will tag this issue. Have asked @sandeshkr419 to update the right release against queries.

- Compute count of requests aggregation with Term query where status equals 200 (query traverses through * node of `port` dimension since `port` is not present as part of query) 
- Compute average request size aggregation with Term query where port equals 5600 (query traverses through * node of `status` dimension since `status` is not present as part of query). 
<br/>The second and third examples uses star nodes.

## When to use star tree index

> You can be use Star Tree index to perform faster aggregations with a constant upper bound on query latency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Star Tree index can be used to perform faster aggregations with a constant upper bound on query latency.
```

- Star Tree natively supports multi field aggregations

> - Star Tree index will be created in real time as part of regular indexing, so the data in Star Tree will always be up to date with the live data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Star Tree index will be created in real time as part of indexing, so the data in Star Tree will always be up to date.
```

> - Star Tree index consolidates the data and hence is a storage efficient index which results in efficient paging and fraction of IO utilization for search queries. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Star Tree index consolidates the data and hence it is storage efficient. It helps in efficient paging and lesser IO utilization for search queries. 
```

## Considerations

> - Star Tree index ideally should be used with append-only indexes, as updates or deletes are not accounted in Star Tree index.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Star Tree index ideally should be used with indices whose data is not updated or deleted, as updates and/or deletes are not accounted in Star Tree index.
```

> - Star Tree index will be used for aggregation queries only if the query input is a subset of the Star Tree configuration of dimensions and metrics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Star Tree index will be used for aggregation queries only if the fields getting queried is a subset of the Star Tree's dimensions and fields getting aggregated is a subset of Start Tree's metrics
```

> - Once star-tree index is enabled for an index, you currently cannot disable it. You have to reindex without the star-tree mapping to remove star-tree from the index.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Once star-tree index is enabled for an index, it cannot be disabled. The data has to be reindexed without the star-tree mapping to remove star-tree from the index.
```

    - Changing Star Tree configuration will also require a re-index operation.
- [Multi-values/array values]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/field-types/supported-field-types/index/#arrays) are not supported

> - Only [limited queries and aggregations](#supported-query-and-aggregations) are supported with support for more coming in future

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Only [limited queries and aggregations](#supported-query-and-aggregations) are supported currently. Support for more features will be released in upcoming versions.
```

> - Set the feature flag `opensearch.experimental.feature.composite_index.star_tree.enabled"` to `true`. For more information about enabling and disabling feature flags, see [Enabling experimental features]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/install-and-configure/configuring-opensearch/experimental/).

Reviewer 2: nit: Can we refer the `star-tree.md` here ?

> - The cardinality of the dimensions should not be very high (like `_id` fields), otherwise it leads to storage explosion and higher query latencies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The cardinality of the dimensions should not be very high (like `_id` fields), otherwise it leads to high storage usage and higher query latency.
```

```json
PUT logs
{
  "settings": {
    "index.number_of_shards": 1,
    "index.number_of_replicas": 0,
    "index.composite_index": true
  },
  "mappings": {
    "composite": {
      "startree1": {
        "type": "star_tree",
        "config": {
          "ordered_dimensions": [
            {
              "name": "status"
            },
            {
              "name": "port"
            }
          ],
          "metrics": [
            {
              "name": "size",
              "stats": [
                "sum"
              ],
              "name": "latency",
              "stats": [
                "avg"
              ]
            }
          ]
        }
      }
    },
    "properties": {
      "status": {
        "type": "integer"
      },
      "port": {
        "type": "integer"
      },
      "size": {
        "type": "integer"
      },
      "latency": {
        "type": "scaled_float",
        "scaling_factor": 10
      }
    }
  }
}
```

For detailed information about Star Tree index mapping and parameters see [Star Tree field type]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/field-types/star-tree/).

## Supported query and aggregations

> Star Tree index can be used to optimize aggregations for selected set of queries with support for more coming in upcoming releases.

Reviewer: can we list down what is supported now (with 2.18)?

Author: We have listed down both queries and aggregations supported already - do you mean anything else ?

Reviewer: Makes sense. 

May be it can be changed to "Star Tree index can be used to optimize aggregations. The list of supported queries is given below, support for more queries will be added in upcoming releases."

- [Term query](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/query-dsl/term/term/)
- [Match all docs query](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/query-dsl/match-all/)

### Supported aggregations
Ensure the following in star tree index mapping,
- The fields present in the aggregation must be present as part of `metrics` as part of star-tree configuration.
- The metric aggregation type must be part of `stats` parameter.
 
Following metric aggregations are supported.
- [Sum](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/aggregations/metric/sum/)
- [Minimum](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/aggregations/metric/minimum/)
- [Maximum](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/aggregations/metric/maximum/)
- [Value count](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/aggregations/metric/value-count/)
- [Average](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/aggregations/metric/average/)

### Examples
To get sum of `request_size` for all error logs with `status=500` with the [example mapping](#defining-star-tree-index-in-mappings) :
```json
POST /logs/_search
{
  "query": {
    "term": {
      "status": "500"
    }
  },
  "aggs": {
    "sum_request_size": {
      "sum": {
        "field": "request_size"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

> This query will get optimized automatically as star-tree index will be used.

Reviewer 2: We can briefly mention the advantage of this being O(1) as the are just 2 lookups instead of scanning through all docs that are produced by the Lucene collector of query 

`TermQuery(Status=500)`

> <br/>With star-tree index, we will be able to retrieve the result with a single aggregated document once we traverse to the `status=500` node as opposed to current query execution which scans through all matching documents and perform summation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<br/>With star-tree index, the result will be retrieved from a single aggregated document as it traverses to the `status=500` node as opposed to current query execution which scans through all the matching documents and perform summation.
```

- Set the `index.composite_index` index setting to `true` during index creation.

## Examples

The following examples show how to use Star Tree index.

### Defining star tree index in mappings

Define Star Tree configuration in index mappings when creating an index. <br/>
To create Star Tree index to pre-compute aggregations for `request_size` and `latency` fields for all the combinations of values in `port` and `status` fields indexed in the `logs` index, configure the following mapping:

```json
PUT logs
{
  "settings": {
    "index.number_of_shards": 1,
    "index.number_of_replicas": 0,
    "index.composite_index": true
  },
  "mappings": {
    "composite": {
      "startree1": {
        "type": "star_tree",
        "config": {
          "ordered_dimensions": [
            {
              "name": "status"
            },
            {
              "name": "port"
            }
          ],
          "metrics": [
            {
              "name": "size",
              "stats": [
                "sum"

>               ],

Reviewer 2: Missing `}`
Causes parsing exception

Author: Good catch both JSONs had same issue, fixed.

---
layout: default
title: Star Tree index
parent: Improving search performance
nav_order: 54
---

# Star tree index

This is an experimental feature and is not recommended for use in a production environment. For updates on the progress the feature or if you want to leave feedback, join the discussion on the [OpenSearch forum](https://forum.opensearch.org/).    
{: .warning}

> Star Tree Index is a multi-field index that improves the performance of aggregations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Star Tree Index (STIX) is a multi-field index that improves the performance of aggregations.
```

> OpenSearch will automatically use the Star Tree index to optimize aggregations if the fields queried are part of Star Tree's dimension fields and the aggregations are on Star Tree's metrics fields. No changes are required in the query syntax or the request parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenSearch will automatically use the STIX to optimize aggregations if the fields queried are part of Star Tree's dimension fields and the aggregations are on Star Tree's metrics fields. No changes are required in the query syntax or the request parameters.
```

- Compute average request size aggregation with Terms query where port equals 8443 and status equals 200 (Support for Terms query will be added in upcoming release, see [GitHub issue](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/15257))
- Compute count of requests aggregation with Term query where status equals 200 (query traverses through * node of `port` dimension since `port` is not present as part of query) 
- Compute average request size aggregation with Term query where port equals 5600 (query traverses through * node of `status` dimension since `status` is not present as part of query). 
<br/>The second and third examples uses star nodes.

## When to use star tree index
Star Tree index can be used to perform faster aggregations with a constant upper bound on query latency.
- Star Tree natively supports multi field aggregations
- Star Tree index will be created in real time as part of indexing, so the data in Star Tree will always be up to date.
- Star Tree index consolidates the data and hence it is storage efficient. It helps in efficient paging and lesser IO utilization for search queries.

## Considerations

> - Star Tree index ideally should be used with indexes whose data is not updated or deleted, as updates and/or deletes are not accounted in Star Tree index.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- STIX should only be used on indexes whose data is not updated or deleted, as updates and/or deletes are not accounted in STIX.
```

To create Star Tree index to pre-compute aggregations for `request_size` and `latency` fields for all the combinations of values in `port` and `status` fields indexed in the `logs` index, configure the following mapping:

```json
PUT logs
{
  "settings": {
    "index.number_of_shards": 1,
    "index.number_of_replicas": 0,
    "index.composite_index": true
  },
  "mappings": {
    "composite": {
      "startree1": {
        "type": "star_tree",
        "config": {
          "ordered_dimensions": [
            {
              "name": "status"
            },
            {
              "name": "port"
            }
          ],
          "metrics": [
            {
              "name": "size",
              "stats": [
                "sum"
              ]
            },
            {
              "name": "latency",
              "stats": [
                "avg"
              ]
            }
          ]
        }
      }
    },
    "properties": {
      "status": {
        "type": "integer"
      },
      "port": {
        "type": "integer"
      },
      "size": {
        "type": "integer"
      },
      "latency": {
        "type": "scaled_float",
        "scaling_factor": 10

>       }

Reviewer 2: Mapping for property `request_size` is missing here and it will cause the search queries to fail with NullPointerException. 
```
      "request_size": {
        "type": "integer"
      }
```

Ensure the following in star tree index mapping,
- The fields present in the query must be present as part of `ordered_dimensions` as part of Star Tree configuration.

### Supported aggregations
 
Following metric aggregations are supported as of OpenSearch 2.18.
- [Sum](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/aggregations/metric/sum/)
- [Minimum](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/aggregations/metric/minimum/)
- [Maximum](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/aggregations/metric/maximum/)
- [Value count](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/aggregations/metric/value-count/)
- [Average](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/aggregations/metric/average/)

Ensure the following in Star Tree index mapping,
- The fields present in the aggregation must be present as part of `metrics` as part of Star Tree configuration.
- The metric aggregation type must be part of `stats` parameter.

### Examples
To get sum of `request_size` for all error logs with `status=500` with the [example mapping](#defining-star-tree-index-in-mappings) :
```json
POST /logs/_search
{
  "query": {
    "term": {
      "status": "500"
    }
  },
  "aggs": {
    "sum_request_size": {
      "sum": {

>         "field": "request_size"

Reviewer 2: ```
[2024-10-24T19:56:56,719][WARN ][r.suppressed             ] [runTask-0] path: /logs/_search, params: {index=logs}
org.opensearch.action.search.SearchPhaseExecutionException: all shards failed
        at org.opensearch.action.search.AbstractSearchAsyncAction.onPhaseFailure(AbstractSearchAsyncAction.java:775) [opensearch-3.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar:3.0.0-SNAPSHOT]
        at org.opensearch.action.search.AbstractSearchAsyncAction.executeNextPhase(AbstractSearchAsyncAction.java:395) [opensearch-3.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar:3.0.0-SNAPSHOT]
        at org.opensearch.action.search.AbstractSearchAsyncAction.onPhaseDone(AbstractSearchAsyncAction.java:815) [opensearch-3.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar:3.0.0-SNAPSHOT]
        at org.opensearch.action.search.AbstractSearchAsyncAction.onShardFailure(AbstractSearchAsyncAction.java:548) [opensearch-3.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar:3.0.0-SNAPSHOT]
        at org.opensearch.action.search.AbstractSearchAsyncAction$1.onFailure(AbstractSearchAsyncAction.java:316) [opensearch-3.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar:3.0.0-SNAPSHOT]
        at org.opensearch.action.search.SearchExecutionStatsCollector.onFailure(SearchExecutionStatsCollector.java:104) [opensearch-3.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar:3.0.0-SNAPSHOT]
        at org.opensearch.action.ActionListenerResponseHandler.handleException(ActionListenerResponseHandler.java:75) [opensearch-3.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar:3.0.0-SNAPSHOT]
        at org.opensearch.action.search.SearchTransportService$ConnectionCountingHandler.handleException(SearchTransportService.java:760) [opensearch-3.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar:3.0.0-SNAPSHOT]
        at org.opensearch.transport.TransportService$9.handleException(TransportService.java:1719) [opensearch-3.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar:3.0.0-SNAPSHOT]
        at org.opensearch.transport.TransportService$ContextRestoreResponseHandler.handleException(TransportService.java:1505) [opensearch-3.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar:3.0.0-SNAPSHOT]
        at org.opensearch.transport.TransportService$DirectResponseChannel.processException(TransportService.java:1619) [opensearch-3.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar:3.0.0-SNAPSHOT]
        at org.opensearch.transport.TransportService$DirectResponseChannel.sendResponse(TransportService.java:1593) [opensearch-3.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar:3.0.0-SNAPSHOT]
        at org.opensearch.transport.TaskTransportChannel.sendResponse(TaskTransportChannel.java:81) [opensearch-3.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar:3.0.0-SNAPSHOT]
        at org.opensearch.transport.TransportChannel.sendErrorResponse(TransportChannel.java:75) [opensearch-3.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar:3.0.0-SNAPSHOT]
        at org.opensearch.action.support.ChannelActionListener.onFailure(ChannelActionListener.java:70) [opensearch-3.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar:3.0.0-SNAPSHOT]
        at org.opensearch.action.ActionRunnable.onFailure(ActionRunnable.java:104) [opensearch-3.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar:3.0.0-SNAPSHOT]
        at org.opensearch.common.util.concurrent.AbstractRunnable.run(AbstractRunnable.java:54) [opensearch-3.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar:3.0.0-SNAPSHOT]
        at org.opensearch.threadpool.TaskAwareRunnable.doRun(TaskAwareRunnable.java:78) [opensearch-3.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar:3.0.0-SNAPSHOT]
        at org.opensearch.common.util.concurrent.AbstractRunnable.run(AbstractRunnable.java:52) [opensearch-3.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar:3.0.0-SNAPSHOT]
        at org.opensearch.common.util.concurrent.TimedRunnable.doRun(TimedRunnable.java:59) [opensearch-3.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar:3.0.0-SNAPSHOT]
        at org.opensearch.common.util.concurrent.ThreadContext$ContextPreservingAbstractRunnable.doRun(ThreadContext.java:982) [opensearch-3.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar:3.0.0-SNAPSHOT]
        at org.opensearch.common.util.concurrent.AbstractRunnable.run(AbstractRunnable.java:52) [opensearch-3.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar:3.0.0-SNAPSHOT]
        at java.base/java.util.concurrent.ThreadPoolExecutor.runWorker(ThreadPoolExecutor.java:1144) [?:?]
        at java.base/java.util.concurrent.ThreadPoolExecutor$Worker.run(ThreadPoolExecutor.java:642) [?:?]
        at java.base/java.lang.Thread.run(Thread.java:1570) [?:?]
Caused by: org.opensearch.OpenSearchException$3: Cannot invoke "org.opensearch.search.aggregations.support.FieldContext.field()" because the return value of "org.opensearch.search.aggregations.support.ValuesSourceConfig.fieldContext()" is null
        at org.opensearch.OpenSearchException.guessRootCauses(OpenSearchException.java:710) ~[opensearch-core-3.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar:3.0.0-SNAPSHOT]
        at org.opensearch.action.search.AbstractSearchAsyncAction.executeNextPhase(AbstractSearchAsyncAction.java:393) [opensearch-3.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar:3.0.0-SNAPSHOT]
        ... 23 more
Caused by: java.lang.NullPointerException: Cannot invoke "org.opensearch.search.aggregations.support.FieldContext.field()" because the return value of "org.opensearch.search.aggregations.support.ValuesSourceConfig.fieldContext()" is null
        at org.opensearch.search.aggregations.support.ValuesSourceAggregatorFactory.getField(ValuesSourceAggregatorFactory.java:107) ~[opensearch-3.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar:3.0.0-SNAPSHOT]
        at org.opensearch.index.compositeindex.datacube.startree.utils.StarTreeQueryHelper.validateStarTreeMetricSupport(StarTreeQueryHelper.java:153) ~[opensearch-3.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar:3.0.0-SNAPSHOT]
        at org.opensearch.index.compositeindex.datacube.startree.utils.StarTreeQueryHelper.getStarTreeQueryContext(StarTreeQueryHelper.java:77) ~[opensearch-3.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar:3.0.0-SNAPSHOT]
        at org.opensearch.search.SearchService.parseSource(SearchService.java:1550) ~[opensearch-3.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar:3.0.0-SNAPSHOT]
        at org.opensearch.search.SearchService.createContext(SearchService.java:1108) ~[opensearch-3.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar:3.0.0-SNAPSHOT]
        at org.opensearch.search.SearchService.executeQueryPhase(SearchService.java:705) ~[opensearch-3.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar:3.0.0-SNAPSHOT]
        at org.opensearch.search.SearchService$2.lambda$onResponse$0(SearchService.java:678) ~[opensearch-3.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar:3.0.0-SNAPSHOT]
        at org.opensearch.action.ActionRunnable.lambda$supply$0(ActionRunnable.java:74) ~[opensearch-3.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar:3.0.0-SNAPSHOT]
        at org.opensearch.action.ActionRunnable$2.doRun(ActionRunnable.java:89) ~[opensearch-3.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar:3.0.0-SNAPSHOT]
        at org.opensearch.common.util.concurrent.AbstractRunnable.run(AbstractRunnable.java:52) ~[opensearch-3.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar:3.0.0-SNAPSHOT]
        ... 8 more
```

>         "field": "request_size"

Author: @sandeshkr419 Can you look into this? I remember fixing this issue during the PR review but somehow we are hitting this error again.

>         "field": "request_size"

Reviewer 2: Filed a bug https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/16473

---
layout: default
title: Star-tree index
parent: Improving search performance
nav_order: 54
---

# Star-tree index

This is an experimental feature and is not recommended for use in a production environment. For updates on the progress the feature or if you want to leave feedback, join the discussion on the [OpenSearch forum](https://forum.opensearch.org/).    
{: .warning}

Star-tree index is a multi-field index that improves the performance of aggregations.

> OpenSearch will automatically use the star-tree index to optimize aggregations if the fields queried are part of star-tree index dimension fields and the aggregations are on star-tree index metrics fields. No changes are required in the query syntax or the request parameters.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
OpenSearch will automatically use a star-tree index to optimize aggregations if the queried fields are part of star-tree index dimension fields and the aggregations are on star-tree index metric fields. No changes are required in the query syntax or the request parameters.
```

## When to use a star-tree index

Star-tree index can be used to perform faster aggregations. Consider the following criteria and features when deciding to use a star-tree index:

- Star-tree indexes natively support multi-field aggregations.

> - Star-tree indexes will be created in real-time as part of the indexing process, so the data in a star-tree will always be up to date.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Star-tree indexes are created in real time as part of the indexing process, so the data in a star-tree will always be up to date.
```

> - A star-tree index consolidates data making the index efficient at paging and using less IO for search queries.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- A star-tree index consolidates data, increasing index paging efficiency and using less IO for search queries.
```

## Limitations

Star-tree indexes contain the following limitations:

> 

Reviewer 3: Line 29: The first part seems a bit redundant (An index should only be used on indexes).

> - Star-tree index should only be used on indexes whose data is not updated or deleted, as updates and deletions are not accounted for in a star-tree index.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- A star-tree index should only be enabled on indexes whose data is not updated or deleted, as updates and deletions are not accounted for in a star-tree index.
```

> - Star-tree index should only be used on indexes whose data is not updated or deleted, as updates and deletions are not accounted for ina  star-tree index.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Star-tree index should only be used on indexes whose data is not updated or deleted, as updates and deletions are not accounted for in a  star-tree index.
```

> - Star-tree index should only be used on indexes whose data is not updated or deleted, as updates and deletions are not accounted for in a  star-tree index.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Star-tree index should only be used on indexes whose data is not updated or deleted, as updates and deletions are not accounted for in a star-tree index.
```

> - Star-tree index should only be used on indexes whose data is not updated or deleted, as updates and deletions are not accounted for in a  star-tree index.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- A star-tree index should only be used on indexes whose data is not updated or deleted because updates and deletions are not accounted for in a star-tree index.
```

> - A star-tree index can be used for aggregation queries only if the fields queried is a subset of the star-trees dimensions and the aggregated fields are a subset of a star-trees metrics.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- A star-tree index can be used for aggregation queries only if the fields queried is a subset of the star-tree's dimensions and the aggregated fields are a subset of a star-tree's metrics.
```

> - A star-tree index can be used for aggregation queries only if the fields queried is a subset of the star-trees dimensions and the aggregated fields are a subset of a star-trees metrics.

Reviewer 3: This sentence is incorrect as written. Please revise.

> - After the star-tree index is enabled for an index, it cannot be disabled. In order to disable the star-tree idnex, the data in the index must be re-indexed without the star-tree mapping. Furthrmore, changing a star-tree configuration will also require a re-index operation.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- After the star-tree index is enabled for an index, it cannot be disabled. In order to disable the star-tree index, the data in the index must be re-indexed without the star-tree mapping. Furthermore, changing a star-tree configuration will also require a re-index operation.
```

> - After the star-tree index is enabled for an index, it cannot be disabled. In order to disable the star-tree index, the data in the index must be re-indexed without the star-tree mapping. Furthermore, changing a star-tree configuration will also require a re-index operation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- After a star-tree index is enabled, it cannot be disabled. In order to disable a star-tree index, the data in the index must be reindexed without the star-tree mapping. Furthermore, changing a star-tree configuration will also require a reindex operation.
```

> - [Multi-values/array values]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/field-types/supported-field-types/index/#arrays) are not supported

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- [Multi-values/array values]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/field-types/supported-field-types/index/#arrays) are not supported.
```

> - Only [limited queries and aggregations](#supported-query-and-aggregations) are supported. Support for more features will be added in future versions.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Only [limited queries and aggregations](#supported-queries-and-aggregations) are supported. Support for more features will be added in future versions.
```

> - Only [limited queries and aggregations](#supported-query-and-aggregations) are supported. Support for more features will be released in upcoming versions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Only [limited queries and aggregations](#supported-query-and-aggregations) are supported. Support for more features will be added in future versions.
```

> - The cardinality of the dimensions should not be very high (like `_id` fields). High cardinality leads to higher storage usage and higher query latency.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The cardinality of the dimensions should not be very high (as with `_id` fields). Higher cardinality leads to increased storage usage and query latency.
```

## Star-tree index structure

The following image illustrates a standard star-tree index structure.

> <img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/star-tree-index.png" alt="A star-tree  index containing two dimensions and two metrics" width="700">

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/star-tree-index.png" alt="A star-tree index containing two dimensions and two metrics" width="700">
```

> Sorted and aggregated star-tree documents are backed by `doc-values` in an index. `doc_values` use the following pattern:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Sorted and aggregated star-tree documents are backed by `doc_values` in an index. `doc_values` use the following pattern:
```

> Sorted and aggregated star-tree documents are backed by `doc-values` in an index. Values follow the following patternL

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Sorted and aggregated star-tree documents are backed by `doc-values` in an index. Values follow the following pattern:
```

> 

Reviewer 3: Above: Let's rewrite to avoid the redundancy of "follow the following".

> - The values are sorted based on the order of `ordered_dimension`, in the previous example, first by `status` and then by `port` for each of the status.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- The values are sorted based on the order of their `ordered_dimension`. The preceding image,  the dimensions are determined by the `status` setting and then by the `port` for each status.
```

> - The values are sorted based on the order of `ordered_dimension`, in the above example, first by `status` and then by `port` for each of the status.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- The values are sorted based on the order of `ordered_dimension`, in the previous example, first by `status` and then by `port` for each of the status.
```

> - The values are sorted based on the order of `ordered_dimension`, in the previous example, first by `status` and then by `port` for each of the status.

Reviewer 3: This sentence is incorrect as written. Please revise.

> - For each unique dimension value combination, the aggregated values for all the metrics such as `avg(size)` and `count(requests)` are pre-computed during ingestion time.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- For each unique dimension value combination, the aggregated values for all the metrics, such as `avg(size)` and `count(requests)`, are precomputed during ingestion.
```

> 

Reviewer 3: Above: "dimension-value" or "dimension/value"?

Reviewer 4: dimension/value

### Leaf nodes

> Each node in a star-tree index points to a range of star-tree documents. Nodes can be further split into child nodes based on the [max_leaf_docs configuration]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/field-types/supported-field-types/star-tree/#star-tree-configuration-parameters). The number of documents that a leaf node points to is less than or equal to the number set by `max_leaf_docs`. This ensures that the maximum number of documents that traverse nodes to get to the aggregated value is at most `max_leaf_docs`, which provides predictable latency.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Each node in a star-tree index points to a range of star-tree documents. Nodes can be further split into child nodes based on the [max_leaf_docs configuration]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/field-types/supported-field-types/star-tree/#star-tree-configuration-parameters). The number of documents that a leaf node points to is less than or equal to the number set by `max_leaf_docs`. This ensures that the maximum number of documents that need to traverse nodes to derive an aggregated value is at most the number of `max_leaf_docs`, which provide predictable latency.
```

> Each node in the star-tree index points to a range of star-tree documents. Nodes can be further split into child nodes based on the[max_leaf_docs configuration]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/field-types/star-tree/#star-tree-configuration-parameters). The number of documents a leaf node points to is less than or equal to the number `max_leaf_docs` set. This ensures the maximum number of documents that traverse across nodes to get to the aggregated value is at most the `max_leaf_docs`, which provides predictable latency.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Each node in the star-tree index points to a range of star-tree documents. Nodes can be further split into child nodes based on the[max_leaf_docs configuration]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/field-types/supported-field-types/star-tree/#star-tree-configuration-parameters). The number of documents a leaf node points to is less than or equal to the number `max_leaf_docs` set. This ensures the maximum number of documents that traverse across nodes to get to the aggregated value is at most the `max_leaf_docs`, which provides predictable latency.
```

> Each node in the star-tree index points to a range of star-tree documents. Nodes can be further split into child nodes based on the[max_leaf_docs configuration]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/field-types/supported-field-types/star-tree/#star-tree-configuration-parameters). The number of documents a leaf node points to is less than or equal to the number `max_leaf_docs` set. This ensures the maximum number of documents that traverse across nodes to get to the aggregated value is at most the `max_leaf_docs`, which provides predictable latency.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Each node in a star-tree index points to a range of star-tree documents. Nodes can be further split into child nodes based on the [max_leaf_docs configuration]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/field-types/supported-field-types/star-tree/#star-tree-configuration-parameters). The number of documents that a leaf node points to is less than or equal to the number set by `max_leaf_docs`. This ensures that the maximum number of documents that traverse nodes to get to the aggregated value is at most `max_leaf_docs`, which provides predictable latency.
```

> 

Reviewer 3: Above: Please revise "to get to" for clarity. "to derive/generate the aggregated value"?

Reviewer 4: "to derive."

### Star nodes

> `star nodes (*)` fetch aggregated document whenever applicable during query time.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`star nodes (*)` fetch aggregated documents during query time.
```

Reviewer 4: Tried to come up with a better explanation based on the Pinot documentation, https://docs.pinot.apache.org/basics/indexing/star-tree-index#index-generation

> `star nodes (*)` fetch aggregated document whenever applicable during query time.

Reviewer 3: The sentence is incorrect as written. Please revise.

> The star-tree index structure contains three examples explaining how documents traverse star-tree nodes during a `Term` query, based on the compute average request size

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The star-tree index structure contains three examples demonstrating how documents traverse star-tree nodes during a `Term` query, based on the compute average request size.
```

> 

Reviewer 3: Above: Please revise "compute average request size" for clarity.

Reviewer 4: I think they're probably met "computed average request size", but I think that's redundant.

Reviewer 4: Went with "average request size."

> Support for the `Term` query will be added in upcoming release. For more information, see [GitHub issue #15257](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/15257).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Support for the `Term` query will be added in a future version. For more information, see [GitHub issue #15257](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/15257).
```

{: .note}

> - Where port the equals `8443` and status equals `200`. Because the status equals `200`, the document does not traverse through a star node.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Where port the equals `8443` and status equals `200`. Because the status equals `200`, the document does not traverse through a star node and is stored at the end of a star-tree document.
```

> - Where port the equals `8443` and status equals `200`. Because the status equals `200`, the document does not traverse through a star node.

Reviewer 3: This list does not appear to be introduced by/connected to anything, and the text needs some rewriting.

Reviewer 4: See line 55.

> The star-tree index structure contains three examples demonstrating how a document traverses or does not traverse star-tree nodes (indicated by the `*` symbol in the diagram) during a `Term` query, based on the average request size of the query and whether the document contains matching dimensions.

Reviewer 4: @natebower: ?

> The star-tree index structure contains three examples demonstrating how a document traverses or does not traverse star-tree nodes (indicated by the `*` symbol in the diagram) during a `Term` query, based on the average request size of the query and whether the document contains matching dimensions.

Reviewer 3: @Naarcha-AWS Works for me, but can we replace the terminating period with a colon, position this para directly before the list, and move the note to after the list?

- Where status equals `200`. The query traverses through a star node in the `port` dimension, since `port` is not present as part of query.

> - Where port equals `5600`. The query traverses through star node in the `status` dimension, since `status` is not present as part of query. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Where port equals `5600`. The query traverses through a star node in the `status` dimension, since `status` is not present as part of query. 
```

> 

Reviewer 4: See my addition to your suggestion above.

> ## Enabling the star-tree index

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Enabling a star-tree index
```

> To use the star-tree index, modify the following settings:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To use a star-tree index, modify the following settings:
```

- Set the feature flag `opensearch.experimental.feature.composite_index.star_tree.enabled` to `true`. For more information about enabling and disabling feature flags, see [Enabling experimental features]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/install-and-configure/configuring-opensearch/experimental/).

> - Set the `indices.composite_index.star_tree.enabled` setting to `true`. For instructions on how to configure OpenSearch, see [configuring settings]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/install-and-configure/configuring-opensearch/index/#static-settings).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Set the `indices.composite_index.star_tree.enabled` setting to `true`. For instructions on how to configure OpenSearch, see [Configuring settings]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/install-and-configure/configuring-opensearch/index/#static-settings).
```

- Set the `index.composite_index` index setting to `true` during index creation.

> - Ensure that the `doc_values` is enabled for the [dimensions](#ordered-dimensions) and [metrics](#metrics) fields used in your star-tree mapping.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Ensure that the `doc_values` parameter is enabled for the `dimensions` and `metrics` fields used in your star-tree mapping.
```

> ## Example

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Example mappings
```

> In the following example, index mappings define the star-tree configuration. This star-tree index pre-computes aggregations in the `log` index. The aggregations are calculated using the `size` and `latency` fields for all the combinations of values indexes in `port` and `status` fields.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the following example, index mappings define the star-tree configuration. This star-tree index precomputes aggregations in the `log` index. The aggregations are calculated using the `size` and `latency` fields for all the combinations of values indexed in the `port` and `status` fields:
```

```json
PUT logs
{
  "settings": {
    "index.number_of_shards": 1,
    "index.number_of_replicas": 0,
    "index.composite_index": true
  },
  "mappings": {
    "composite": {
      "request_aggs": {
        "type": "star_tree",
        "config": {
          "ordered_dimensions": [
            {
              "name": "status"
            },
            {
              "name": "port"
            }
          ],
          "metrics": [
            {
              "name": "size",
              "stats": [
                "sum"
              ]
            },
            {
              "name": "latency",
              "stats": [
                "avg"
              ]
            }
          ]
        }
      }
    },
    "properties": {
      "status": {
        "type": "integer"
      },
      "port": {
        "type": "integer"
      },
      "size": {
        "type": "integer"
      },
      "latency": {
        "type": "scaled_float",
        "scaling_factor": 10
      }
    }
  }
}
```

> For detailed information about star-tree index mapping and parameters see [star-tree  field type]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/field-types/star-tree/).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For detailed information about star-tree index mapping and parameters see [star-tree field type]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/field-types/star-tree/).
```

> For detailed information about star-tree index mapping and parameters see [star-tree  field type]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/field-types/star-tree/).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For detailed information about star-tree index mapping and parameters see [star-tree field type]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/field-types/supported-field-types/star-tree/).
```

> For detailed information about star-tree index mapping and parameters see [star-tree field type]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/field-types/supported-field-types/star-tree/).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For detailed information about star-tree index mapping and parameters see [Star-tree field type]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/field-types/supported-field-types/star-tree/).
```

> 

Reviewer 3: Above: "mapping" => "mappings"?

Reviewer 4: mappings

> ## Supported query and aggregations

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Supported queries and aggregations
```

Star-tree indexes can be used to optimize queries and aggregations. 

### Supported queries
The following queries are supported as of OpenSearch 2.18:

- [Term query](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/query-dsl/term/term/)
- [Match all docs query](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/query-dsl/match-all/)

> To use queries, the queries fields must present in the `ordered_dimensions` section of the star-tree configuration.

Reviewer 3: The sentence is incorrect as written. Please revise.

### Supported aggregations
 

> Following metric aggregations are supported as of OpenSearch 2.18.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following metric aggregations are supported as of OpenSearch 2.18:
```

- [Sum](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/aggregations/metric/sum/)
- [Minimum](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/aggregations/metric/minimum/)
- [Maximum](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/aggregations/metric/maximum/)
- [Value count](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/aggregations/metric/value-count/)
- [Average](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/aggregations/metric/average/)

To use aggregations:

> - The fields must present in the `metrics` section of the star-tree configuration.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The fields must be present in the `metrics` section of the star-tree configuration.
```

- The metric aggregation type must be part of the `stats` parameter.

> ### Examples

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Aggregation example
```

> The following example gets the sum of the `size`field for all error logs with `status=500`, using the [example mapping](#defining-star-tree-index-in-mappings):

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The following example gets the sum of the `size` field for all error logs with `status=500`, using the [example mapping](#example):
```

```json
POST /logs/_search
{
  "query": {
    "term": {
      "status": "500"
    }
  },
  "aggs": {
    "sum_size": {
      "sum": {
        "field": "size"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

> With the star-tree index, the result will be retrieved from a single aggregated document as it traverses to the `status=500` node, as opposed to scanning through all the matching documents. This will results in lower query latency.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
With the star-tree index, the result will be retrieved from a single aggregated document as it traverses to the `status=500` node, as opposed to scanning through all of the matching documents. This results in lower query latency.
```

> With the star-tree index, the result will be retrieved from a single aggregated document as it traverses to the `status=500` node, as opposed to scanning through all the matching documents. This will results in lower query latency.

Reviewer 3: Should "to the" be included here, or should it just be "as it traverses the `status=500` node"? In the second sentence, either "This will result" or "This results".

> ## Using queries with the star-tree index

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Using queries with a star-tree index
```

> Set the `indices.composite_index.star_tree.enabled` setting to `false` to run queries without using star-tree index.

Reviewer 4: Will star-tree still be enabled on the index if this setting is disabled @bharath-techie?

> Set the `indices.composite_index.star_tree.enabled` setting to `false` to run queries without using star-tree index.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Set the `indices.composite_index.star_tree.enabled` setting to `false` to run queries without using a star-tree index.
```

This is an experimental feature and is not recommended for use in a production environment. For updates on the progress of the feature or if you want to leave feedback, join the discussion on the [OpenSearch forum](https://forum.opensearch.org/).    
{: .warning}

A star-tree index is a multi-field index that improves the performance of aggregations.

OpenSearch will automatically use a star-tree index to optimize aggregations if the queried fields are part of star-tree index dimension fields and the aggregations are on star-tree index metric fields. No changes are required in the query syntax or the request parameters.

## When to use a star-tree index

A star-tree index can be used to perform faster aggregations. Consider the following criteria and features when deciding to use a star-tree index:

- Star-tree indexes natively support multi-field aggregations.
- Star-tree indexes are created in real time as part of the indexing process, so the data in a star-tree will always be up to date.
- A star-tree index consolidates data, increasing index paging efficiency and using less IO for search queries.

## Limitations

Star-tree indexes have the following limitations:

> - A star-tree index should only be enabled on indexes whose data is not updated or deleted because updates and deletions are not accounted for in a star-tree index.

Reviewer 5: nit - indices (not indexes)

Author: This seems to be a practice in all opensearch documentation to use indexes instead of indices

- After a star-tree index is enabled, it cannot be disabled. In order to disable a star-tree index, the data in the index must be reindexed without the star-tree mapping. Furthermore, changing a star-tree configuration will also require a reindex operation.
- [Multi-values/array values]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/field-types/supported-field-types/index/#arrays) are not supported.
- Only [limited queries and aggregations](#supported-queries-and-aggregations) are supported. Support for more features will be added in future versions.
- The cardinality of the dimensions should not be very high (as with `_id` fields). Higher cardinality leads to increased storage usage and query latency.

## Star-tree index structure

The following image illustrates a standard star-tree index structure.

<img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/star-tree-index.png" alt="A star-tree index containing two dimensions and two metrics" width="700">

Sorted and aggregated star-tree documents are backed by `doc_values` in an index. `doc_values` use the following pattern:

> - The values are sorted based on the order of their `ordered_dimension`. In the preceding image, the dimensions are determined by the `status` setting and then by the `port` for each status.

Author: The values across fields are primary sorted based on first field in `ordered_dimension`, secondary sorted by corresponding fields mentioned in the `ordered_dimension`

Author: Not exact wording but we need to call out that the sort is based on the fields specified in the ordered dimension.

- For each unique dimension/value combination, the aggregated values for all the metrics, such as `avg(size)` and `count(requests)`, are precomputed during ingestion.

### Leaf nodes

Each node in a star-tree index points to a range of star-tree documents. Nodes can be further split into child nodes based on the [max_leaf_docs configuration]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/field-types/supported-field-types/star-tree/#star-tree-configuration-parameters). The number of documents that a leaf node points to is less than or equal to the number set by `max_leaf_docs`. This ensures that the maximum number of documents that need to traverse nodes to derive an aggregated value is at most the number of `max_leaf_docs`, which provides predictable latency.

### Star nodes

> Star nodes are children of non-leaf nodes that contain preaggregated records for data split after dimension removal, aggregating metrics for rows containing dimensions with identical values. These aggregated documents are then appended to the end of star-tree documents. If a document does contain a dimension with identical values, it traverses through the star node.

Author: This is inaccurate as star nodes can be leaf or non - leaf nodes. Lets reword as below: 

"""
Star nodes are special nodes which has the aggregated data of all the other nodes in the same dimension. 

1. This helps when we need to query the aggregated value of a particular field without traversing through all the values of a particular dimension.
2. This also helps in skipping the dimension which is not part of the query.
"""

Author: The original wording itself looks good to me

"""
There are special nodes called star nodes (*) which helps in skipping non-competitive nodes and also in fetching aggregated document wherever applicable during query time.
"""

> The star-tree index structure diagram contains the following three examples demonstrating how a document does or does not traverse star-tree nodes (indicated by the `*` symbol in the diagram) during a `Term` query, based on the average request size of the query and whether the document contains matching dimensions:

Author: we must be talking about query algorithm here

"""
The star-tree index structure diagram contains the following three examples demonstrating how query algorithm traverses the star tree to get the results
"""

> - When the port equals `8443` and the status equals `200`. Because the status equals `200`, the query does not traverse through a star node, and the aggregated metric is stored at the end of a star-tree document.

Author: Lets not talk about how star node is traversed / not traversed. Lets keep the wording on how query algorithm traverses the star tree as a whole for a particular query. Image clearly explains the path which is taken by the query

Something similar to the original wording

```
 - Compute average request size aggregation with Terms query where port equals 8443 and status equals 200 - the query visits the actual nodes of 8443 and 200 values(Support for Terms query will be added in upcoming release, see https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/15257)
    Compute count of requests aggregation with Term query where status equals 200 (query traverses through * node of port dimension since port is not present as part of query)
    Compute average request size aggregation with Term query where port equals 5600 (query traverses through * node of status dimension since status is not present as part of query).
    The second and third examples uses star nodes.
```

- When the status equals `200`. The query traverses through a star node in the `port` dimension because `port` is not present as part of the query.
- When the port equals `5600`. The query traverses through a star node in the `status` dimension because `status` is not present as part of the query.

> Support for the `Term` query will be added in a future version. For more information, see [GitHub issue #15257](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/15257).

Author: No this should be `Terms` query. `Term` query is already supported.

Author: maybe we can say individual term query is already supported and support for multiple terms query is to be supported to avoid confusion to the user

Reviewer 4: We can just switch to `terms` here.

{: .note}

## Enabling a star-tree index

To use a star-tree index, modify the following settings:

- Set the feature flag `opensearch.experimental.feature.composite_index.star_tree.enabled` to `true`. For more information about enabling and disabling feature flags, see [Enabling experimental features]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/install-and-configure/configuring-opensearch/experimental/).
- Set the `indices.composite_index.star_tree.enabled` setting to `true`. For instructions on how to configure OpenSearch, see [Configuring settings]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/install-and-configure/configuring-opensearch/index/#static-settings).
- Set the `index.composite_index` index setting to `true` during index creation.
- Ensure that the `doc_values` parameter is enabled for the `dimensions` and `metrics` fields used in your star-tree mapping.

## Example mapping

> In the following example, index mappings define the star-tree configuration. This star-tree index precomputes aggregations in the `log` index. The aggregations are calculated using the `size` and `latency` fields for all the combinations of values indexed in the `port` and `status` fields:

Author: nit : `logs` index

    "index.composite_index": true
  },
  "mappings": {
    "composite": {
      "request_aggs": {
        "type": "star_tree",
        "config": {
          "ordered_dimensions": [
            {
              "name": "status"
            },
            {
              "name": "port"
            }
          ],
          "metrics": [
            {
              "name": "size",
              "stats": [
                "sum"
              ]
            },
            {
              "name": "latency",
              "stats": [
                "avg"
              ]
            }
          ]
        }
      }
    },
    "properties": {
      "status": {
        "type": "integer"
      },
      "port": {
        "type": "integer"
      },
      "size": {
        "type": "integer"
      },
      "latency": {
        "type": "scaled_float",
        "scaling_factor": 10
      }
    }
  }
}
```

For detailed information about star-tree index mappings and parameters, see [Star-tree field type]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/field-types/supported-field-types/star-tree/).

## Supported queries and aggregations

Star-tree indexes can be used to optimize queries and aggregations. 

> ### Supported queries

Reviewer 5: This section gives the impression that these query shapes are supported independently.
Ideally this should be a sub-section within `Supported Aggregations` itself. 

Basically, with the below supported aggregations, one can also add a term-query to a search request.

The following queries are supported as of OpenSearch 2.18:

- [Term query](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/query-dsl/term/term/)
- [Match all docs query](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/query-dsl/match-all/)

To use queries with a star-tree index, the query's fields must be present in the `ordered_dimensions` section of the star-tree configuration.

### Supported aggregations
 
The following metric aggregations are supported as of OpenSearch 2.18:
- [Sum](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/aggregations/metric/sum/)
- [Minimum](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/aggregations/metric/minimum/)
- [Maximum](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/aggregations/metric/maximum/)
- [Value count](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/aggregations/metric/value-count/)
- [Average](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/aggregations/metric/average/)

To use aggregations:

- The fields must be present in the `metrics` section of the star-tree configuration.
- The metric aggregation type must be part of the `stats` parameter.

### Aggregation example

> The following example gets the sum of the `size` field for all error logs with `status=500`, using the [example mapping](#example-mapping):

Author: Can we reword to something similar : 

The following example gets the sum of all the values in the `size` field - for all error logs with `status=500`, using the [example mapping](#example-mapping):

```json
POST /logs/_search
{
  "query": {
    "term": {
      "status": "500"
    }
  },
  "aggs": {
    "sum_size": {
      "sum": {
        "field": "size"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

With the star-tree index, the result will be retrieved from a single aggregated document as it traverses to the `status=500` node, as opposed to scanning through all of the matching documents. This results in lower query latency.

> ## Using queries with a star-tree index

Author: Should this be without star tree index ?
